Oh my God.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's get started.
Um, today we're going to talk about categories, and, uh.
NOTE CONF
Can you hear me?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, I have a bit of a cold.
Um, so we're going to start talking about categories.
NOTE CONF
So categories are language adjacent.
So we're no longer really within the domain of language.
NOTE CONF
But um, as you will see, um, category categories concepts
are a bit like words but more abstract.
NOTE CONF
And but before we start with that, I owe you
a little bit of material from the last lecture.
NOTE CONF
So let's look at that briefly.
Last time we looked at vector semantics and how you
NOTE CONF
could represent the meaning of of words using what's been
called context vectors or word embeddings.
NOTE CONF
So these are basically vectors of numbers that represent the
context in which a word can occur.
NOTE CONF
And we've looked at one particular model which is sort
of a classic model, a simple model that was proposed
NOTE CONF
about ten years ago for computing these word embeddings called
word to vec.
NOTE CONF
And the idea is we take a vocabulary.
So here for example, these are names of of cities
NOTE CONF
and countries.
And we represent the vocabulary as a set of what's
NOTE CONF
called one hot vectors.
So as you can see these are vectors that are
NOTE CONF
zero everywhere except in one place.
So if the first element of the vector is the
NOTE CONF
one, then that represents Rome.
If the second one is one that represents Paris, and
NOTE CONF
so on.
So if we have a vocabulary size V, then we
NOTE CONF
can have.
We can represent v words using this one hot representation.
NOTE CONF
And we use this one hot representation in as part
of a simple neural network.
NOTE CONF
This is the architecture here.
So we have our words represented as one hot vectors
NOTE CONF
for the input layer.
And this is the context in which the word occurs
NOTE CONF
that we're interested in modelling.
So here x1 x2 up to xk are the context
NOTE CONF
words.
They're all represented using this one hot representation.
NOTE CONF
Then we have a hidden layer which is much much
smaller in terms of its dimensions.
NOTE CONF
So let's say the input layer, each one hot vector
has 10,000 dimensions.
NOTE CONF
It can be more 100,000 million dimensions depending on how
many words we want to capture.
NOTE CONF
The hidden layer will just have a few hundred dimensions.
And then we have the output layer, which is again
NOTE CONF
a one hot representation.
But now the output word.
NOTE CONF
So these are context words.
And this is the word that we would like to
NOTE CONF
predict.
So we can train a network like this using backpropagation
NOTE CONF
in the standard way.
And we can do this quite easily if we have
NOTE CONF
a large amount of text.
Because in a text and we've seen an example here,
NOTE CONF
we can just take the words we're interested in here
learn, discover and so on and then the context around
NOTE CONF
it.
So here the task is to take the context words
NOTE CONF
initial understanding two meaning the off and so on and
predict the target word.
NOTE CONF
And this is what we're training the the model to
do.
NOTE CONF
And if you train it for long enough, and in
particular if you use enough training data, then you get
NOTE CONF
representations which you can just read off this hidden layer
here.
NOTE CONF
So the representation of the context word w is the
activation of the hidden layer here.
NOTE CONF
And so this hidden layer representation is much more dense.
It's not one hot.
NOTE CONF
It's a dense vector, and it's much more lower dimensional.
And each word can be associated with a representation like
NOTE CONF
this a word embedding.
And these word embeddings then you can compare them using
NOTE CONF
cosine using distance.
Or you can also do some arithmetic on it.
NOTE CONF
You can subtract and add them.
And we've seen some fun examples like these where you
NOTE CONF
can take the vector for Paris, subtract the vector for
France and add the vector of Italy.
NOTE CONF
And then you find the nearest token, the nearest other
word with cosine.
NOTE CONF
And that is Rome.
And so on.
NOTE CONF
So you can you can solve simple reasoning problems like
that using these word vectors.
NOTE CONF
You can do a lot of other stuff, but we
are interested in cognitive applications in particular.
NOTE CONF
So let's assume we have induced these these word vectors
for large vocabulary.
NOTE CONF
What can we do with that.
So one thing we can do is model lexical processes.
NOTE CONF
Semantic priming is one of these processes.
So that's a classic task in psycholinguistics.
NOTE CONF
And you use a lexical decision task, which is a
task where people see a word.
NOTE CONF
And then they have to decide, is this an actual
word of English or is it.
NOTE CONF
Is it a non-word?
And so in this experiment by Tille and colleagues, they
NOTE CONF
showed people a context such as this.
The gardener pulled the hose around the holes in the
NOTE CONF
yard.
Perhaps the water would solve this problem with a mole.
NOTE CONF
And then you give the participants various words to react
to, to do lexical decision on ground, for example, face
NOTE CONF
drawn cancer.
And what you would find is that the words that
NOTE CONF
are related to the context.
So mole is ambiguous, right?
NOTE CONF
Mole can be a skin abnormality, or it can be
a small rodent.
NOTE CONF
And in this context, of course it's a small rodent.
And so related to that would be ground and drown
NOTE CONF
but not face and cancer.
So that means ground and ground would give you shorter
NOTE CONF
reaction times than face and cancer.
But if you change the context the patient sends sensed
NOTE CONF
that this was not a routine visit.
The doctor hinted that there was a reason to remove
NOTE CONF
the mole.
So now this is no longer related to ground, but
NOTE CONF
it's related to face, not related to drone, but related
to cancer.
NOTE CONF
So and now we can use our word representation to
try to model this behaviour.
NOTE CONF
We can simply look at distances right.
So the vector for mole would incorporate both meanings right.
NOTE CONF
The rodent meaning and the skin meaning.
But if we look at the context vector.
NOTE CONF
So for example we take the vectors of all the
words in the context.
NOTE CONF
We could average those for example.
And then we see whether that's closer to ground face
NOTE CONF
drawn on cancer.
Um, and so, um, if there's a larger cosine between
NOTE CONF
the ambiguous word and the related works compared to control
and the vector average of those context, words should have
NOTE CONF
a higher cosine with the semantically congruent words, the words
that correspond to the same meaning.
NOTE CONF
And that's what what you find.
So, uh, this is the, uh, the doctor, uh, skin
NOTE CONF
lesion context.
And there this is the cosine between that context and
NOTE CONF
ground face down in cancer.
And you get a higher cosine for face and for
NOTE CONF
cancer.
And then if you swap this for the other context,
NOTE CONF
then the effect is reversed.
And you would get a higher cosine for ground and
NOTE CONF
drown.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So if you take the first context here.
So this is a way of modelling the relatedness of
NOTE CONF
words.
In particular, it deals with the fact that words can
NOTE CONF
be ambiguous, and then the context can tell you which
which meaning is the correct one.
NOTE CONF
So this is something that people have done.
Another application would be to capture, for example, a synonym
NOTE CONF
task.
So this is from the Tufnell test, a test of
NOTE CONF
English as a foreign language.
And that test contains questions like this.
NOTE CONF
You will find the office at the main intersection and
then choose the synonym right place, crossroads roundabout building and
NOTE CONF
what you can do here.
You can just take the vector of intersection, the word
NOTE CONF
embedding of intersection.
And compared to the embedding for place, for crossroads, for
NOTE CONF
roundabout and for building.
And presumably the synonym is most similar.
NOTE CONF
Right.
It's a synonym of intersection will be most similar to
NOTE CONF
intersection itself.
So you can just take the cosine between intersection and
NOTE CONF
place between intersection crossroads, and so on.
And in this case, crossroads is the closest word embedding
NOTE CONF
out of those four.
And using this simple method you can get 80% correct
NOTE CONF
on the on the synonym task.
And this was before LMS were even invented.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So LMS can do this task of course as well.
NOTE CONF
But this is a much, much simpler model that just
uses lexical vectors.
NOTE CONF
And.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So the uh, you get about 80% correct.
Uh, the average of the test takers is about 65%.
NOTE CONF
And here's a paper that, uh, that explained this explains
this in more detail.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so we have a way of representing words which
NOTE CONF
we can we can build these representations just from raw
text.
NOTE CONF
We don't need to engineer complicated rules or, uh, um,
do a lot of, um, complicated probabilities or counting anything
NOTE CONF
like that.
So this is really something that, uh, who strength it
NOTE CONF
is that it is very simple and it can work
with large amounts of data.
NOTE CONF
That's really where the, uh, the representational power comes from.
You saw the models.
NOTE CONF
The model is really simple.
And, uh, of course, in subsequent work, people have developed
NOTE CONF
more complicated word embedding models.
But the idea is, is really the same.
NOTE CONF
You try to model the context in which a word
occurs and you're predicting the word or the context.
NOTE CONF
In fact, you can do you can do it in
either direction.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's limitations as, as we quickly mentioned last time.
So you don't have different word senses, right?
NOTE CONF
The two different senses of mould, it's the same vector.
There's no way of distinguishing it.
NOTE CONF
Um, you don't really have a representation for word order.
So these two sentences.
NOTE CONF
They mean the same for the word vectors.
Because, you know, if you add vectors or uh, the
NOTE CONF
the context is not ordered in the model.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Here we just have an average essentially.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Because it's a weighted sum um, in the model.
So these context words, when we compute the hidden layer
NOTE CONF
it's just the sum of the inputs.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So the order doesn't matter if you're some things.
So we have no easy way of representing uh word
NOTE CONF
order.
And again this is something that people have later tried
NOTE CONF
to solve.
There's something called position embeddings, which is used in all
NOTE CONF
the more modern language models, uh, to try to deal
with this problem of, uh, the order of the words
NOTE CONF
not being represented.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, let's now move from words to categories.
So we talk about conceptual categories.
NOTE CONF
What's the difference.
And then we look at two main theories of categorisation.
NOTE CONF
One of them is the classical theory which is the
feature based account and similarity based accounts.
NOTE CONF
These are actually quite similar to the embeddings we just
seen.
NOTE CONF
We've just seen because they represent the categories as something
like vectors, vectors of features or vectors of properties, but
NOTE CONF
they also use a notion of similarity.
So they're cognate in terms of the concepts that you're
NOTE CONF
using with the word embeddings.
And then we talk a little bit about potential problems.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we've discussed words starting with the lexicon and word
NOTE CONF
segmentation finding the boundaries in the speech speed stream using
things like minimum description length to to figure out how
NOTE CONF
to divide the speed stream into words in a lexicon,
which which words to assume, and how this relates to
NOTE CONF
the boundaries.
We've looked at probabilities as a way of finding the
NOTE CONF
boundaries.
Then we've looked at word learning in the sense of
NOTE CONF
finding the reference of of a word.
So what does the word dog mean?
NOTE CONF
If we learn a new word like ducks, what does
that mean?
NOTE CONF
And so on.
So what are the mechanisms there?
NOTE CONF
We've seen a set of biases for word learning.
And then last time we looked at word semantics at
NOTE CONF
the vector based representations of of words.
So categories which is what we're going to talk about
NOTE CONF
today are more abstract than words.
And we will see how.
NOTE CONF
They can include simple classes of objects.
For example dog right.
NOTE CONF
Without words, you don't refer to an individual dog.
It's a set of possible objects that share certain properties.
NOTE CONF
Can be abstract categories, things like even number or prime
number or power of two, which we cannot easily define
NOTE CONF
in terms of just a set of things that we
have been exposed to.
NOTE CONF
There's obviously an infinite number of prime numbers or more
complicated abstract concepts like democracy, rectitude or something like that.
NOTE CONF
So children are able to acquire categories roughly at the
same time when they're acquiring language.
NOTE CONF
So they and this is an interesting process in the
sense that it's not directly dependent on language.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Children in different countries, different cultures, they learn different languages,
NOTE CONF
but they end up roughly with the same set of
categories.
NOTE CONF
So how do how does category development work.
And in particular, how do we figure out whether something
NOTE CONF
belongs to a particular category?
So first let's try to define categories or concepts.
NOTE CONF
So we will look at the function of concepts.
We look at how people categorise things put them into
NOTE CONF
into categories and how these concepts or categories are represented.
You're already wondering perhaps why I sometimes say categories, sometimes
NOTE CONF
say concepts.
I will use the two terms as synonyms.
NOTE CONF
In the literature, there's sometimes a distinction in that categories
are more concrete things like cats and dogs and tables.
NOTE CONF
Whereas concepts are more abstract things like even number or
democracy.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But for the purposes of this lecture, we don't really
NOTE CONF
need to make a distinction between categories and concepts.
So a concept is a class of objects or events
NOTE CONF
or things that somehow belong together and are put into
a set or a class or a and or a
NOTE CONF
category.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we can just think of them as sets.
And the process of taking an individual object, sometimes called
NOTE CONF
an exemplar, and deciding which concept it belongs to.
So this is Fido, which is my pet at home
NOTE CONF
and belongs to the category dog.
That process is called categorisation.
NOTE CONF
Categorisation.
Okay, so why?
NOTE CONF
Why is this useful?
Why categorise things?
NOTE CONF
So first of all, cognitive economy right.
We don't need to talk about individual domestic animals, individual
NOTE CONF
Fido's or whatever the dog is called.
We can generalise.
NOTE CONF
We can say in general a dog is a certain
size, has fur bags.
NOTE CONF
Certain properties are shared among all members of the category.
That makes it more efficient.
NOTE CONF
Decreases the amount of information we need to process.
We can also make perception more efficient because there are
NOTE CONF
certain features that are distinctive.
For example, I don't know barking is is that's typical
NOTE CONF
of dogs, but having fur is you know, cats have
that too.
NOTE CONF
Lots of other animals have fur.
So it makes things easier to perceive, to learn, to
NOTE CONF
remember, to recognise, and so on.
It also allows us to make predictions.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So you go to a friend's house and you see
NOTE CONF
an animal.
It looks like a dog.
NOTE CONF
Never seen the animal before, but if you categorise it
as a dog, then you know roughly what kind of
NOTE CONF
behaviour to expect.
For example.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you can make predictions.
NOTE CONF
Communication categories are important.
If I say dog, it's very likely that most of
NOTE CONF
you will mean something very similar because you have the
same category.
NOTE CONF
It's independent of the of which language you speak and
so on.
NOTE CONF
So they help us communicate as well.
Here's an example.
NOTE CONF
So Roche, who's one of the founders of of the
categorisation literature.
NOTE CONF
So she has a following quote one wishes to gain
from one's categories is a is a great deal of
NOTE CONF
information about the environment while conserving finite resources as much
as possible.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So you don't want to do a lot of processing
NOTE CONF
or use a lot of memory.
It's an abstraction, an abbreviation that makes things more efficient.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's look at the category cat.
NOTE CONF
And so if I recognise this animal as a cat
then I automatically know a lot of things about it.
NOTE CONF
Catches mice, likes milk, fish, uh, likes to rub up
against people and objects.
NOTE CONF
It's a feline in terms of taxonomy related to tigers
and lions, is said to have nine lives in folklore.
NOTE CONF
Sleeps a lot.
Night active.
NOTE CONF
Has whiskers.
I know things about the behaviour.
NOTE CONF
It's difficult to train normally.
In contrast to dogs, for example, catches mice.
NOTE CONF
That's also part of the behaviour and so on.
So all of this is somehow included in the category
NOTE CONF
cat.
Plus physical properties of course.
NOTE CONF
Right.
It is a certain size, typically has fur.
NOTE CONF
Um it has sharp teeth and so on.
These physical properties of course, but it goes way beyond
NOTE CONF
that.
So and let's assume it's a new category, right.
NOTE CONF
At some point a child has not encountered any cats
before, but then they encounter a few cats and they're
NOTE CONF
able to abstract and generalise and come up with a
category cat.
NOTE CONF
And that's more economical Then, remembering the features of all
the cards that the child has seen.
NOTE CONF
And there can be exceptions, of course.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So the category bird, for example, normally includes the bird
can fly, but of course there's flightless birds, I don't
NOTE CONF
know, penguins and ostriches and so on.
So the occasional exception doesn't seem to prevent us from
NOTE CONF
making this categorisation decision.
Okay, so we don't have to track all the features
NOTE CONF
separately.
And this leads us to the classical theory of categorisation.
NOTE CONF
And this theory is not really a theory that people
still adhere to.
NOTE CONF
But it's important to see why it doesn't work, because
that explains why the other theories of categorisation are preferred.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this literally goes back to Aristotle.
One of his books is called categories.
NOTE CONF
And he had the idea that categories are just a
list of features, essentially.
NOTE CONF
So.
These features need to be necessary and jointly sufficient.
NOTE CONF
So that means an object to be part of the
category has to have these necessary features.
NOTE CONF
And altogether the necessary features are enough to define the
category right.
NOTE CONF
You don't need any other features.
So it's a complete set.
NOTE CONF
And then you have a very simple theory of categorisation.
Learning amounts to figuring out what the features are, and
NOTE CONF
then assigning an object to a category amounts to just
checking the features.
NOTE CONF
So for Cat it's mice, has fur, sharp teeth and
so on.
NOTE CONF
You check the lists, the list, and then you decide
that this is a cat rather than a dog.
NOTE CONF
So simple.
It looks something like this.
NOTE CONF
Teacup is a concrete object, has a concave shape, can
hold liquids, has a handle, and it's typically used for
NOTE CONF
hot drinks or hot liquids.
So.
NOTE CONF
And these all need to be necessary features.
So that means an object has to have all these
NOTE CONF
features in order to be a teacup.
And they have to be jointly sufficient.
NOTE CONF
So all of these features together define the teacup and
nothing more is required.
NOTE CONF
So let's see does this actually work?
Here's a short quiz.
NOTE CONF
So if you haven't scanned the QR code take a
moment to do that.
NOTE CONF
And I'm.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay, a few more participants.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So quick exercise.
We talked about the Aristotelian theory that says you have
NOTE CONF
to have a set of necessary and jointly sufficient features.
So which of the following do you think is a
NOTE CONF
necessary feature of the category cat.
So necessary means if it doesn't have this feature it's
NOTE CONF
not a cat.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Oh, yes.
Thank.
NOTE CONF
You.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Well, I guess you could.
Say that last.
NOTE CONF
Time.
I would say that I woke up.
NOTE CONF
Like that.
Okay, let's see what people thought.
NOTE CONF
These are the results.
So there isn't really a very clear picture.
NOTE CONF
First feature is small domestic animal.
Um, so depends a little bit on whether you focus
NOTE CONF
on the small.
I mean, all cats I think, have to be small.
NOTE CONF
Unless, you know, they're not domestic cats, but lions or
something like that.
NOTE CONF
But do they have to be domestic?
What about a wild cat?
NOTE CONF
What about a stray cat?
So maybe sharp claws?
NOTE CONF
Well, in theory.
But what about cats?
NOTE CONF
You know, who, uh, have lost their claws or their
claws have become.
NOTE CONF
Uh, they're no longer sharp.
Maybe it's a very old cat.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's still a cat, right?
Fur coat?
NOTE CONF
Well, yes.
Maybe the typical cat has a fur coat, but there
NOTE CONF
is naked cat breeds as well, so these don't have
any fur or have very little fur.
NOTE CONF
Long tail.
Sure, many cats have long tails, but you could imagine
NOTE CONF
a cat that has lost its tail and still a
cat Ruff tongue.
NOTE CONF
Probably hard to imagine.
Cat without ruff tongue.
NOTE CONF
Sharp teeth.
Well, cats are actually quite.
NOTE CONF
I used to have a cat.
Cats are quite common.
NOTE CONF
It's quite common that they get gum disease and then
they can lose their teeth.
NOTE CONF
So that's very sad.
But then there's still cats.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So, um, what I, what I'm trying to show here
NOTE CONF
is that, yes, these are all very reasonable features, but
are there are they necessary?
NOTE CONF
Perhaps not.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So a cat that happens to lose its tail or
its teeth is still a cat.
NOTE CONF
And so there's something at odds with this, with this
theory here.
NOTE CONF
Um, so let's go back and look at alternatives.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, the, the classical theory implies certain things.
So all members of the are equally good, all members
NOTE CONF
of the category are equally good, and the category boundaries
are really inflexible.
NOTE CONF
So in the sense that if this cat doesn't happen
to have a tail, then it's no longer a cat.
NOTE CONF
According to this theory, right.
If cat is an if tail is a necessary feature,
NOTE CONF
on the other hand, it's quite intuitive.
It's very economical.
NOTE CONF
You just write down the features and you check the
features.
NOTE CONF
Easy to talk about.
And in fact, if you look at definitions then they
NOTE CONF
often are in terms of features.
So in in a in a textbook you define a
NOTE CONF
certain concept.
In maths you define I don't know prime number or
NOTE CONF
something like that.
Or in a, in a In a dictionary, you define
NOTE CONF
a word.
Often these are in terms of features, so it's easy
NOTE CONF
to communicate.
Easy to check.
NOTE CONF
Category membership once you have the definition.
So it's really hard to find a good set of
NOTE CONF
features though that are really necessary or insufficient.
As we saw, there's borderline cases.
NOTE CONF
As I said, the cat that happens to be particularly
small or happens to be a breed without fur.
NOTE CONF
Is that still a cat?
Maybe we want to include it, but we want to
NOTE CONF
say maybe it's not a typical cat.
And this is actually called topicality effects.
NOTE CONF
So if you ask people to describe a cat and
then we'll describe a typical cat or pick out out
NOTE CONF
of a set of pictures, people can pick out the
most typical exemplar of a category.
NOTE CONF
So this is called topicality effects and the definitional theory.
The Aristotelian theory doesn't have anything to say about that.
NOTE CONF
So that's another limitation.
And then in some cases people can't even agree on
NOTE CONF
definitions.
What is art.
NOTE CONF
What is a game?
What is a teacup even.
NOTE CONF
And here, for example, if we go back to our
teacup definition and we look at properties four and five.
NOTE CONF
Well you could imagine a teacup without handles for example
Chinese or Japanese teacups normally don't have handles.
NOTE CONF
Um, can be used to drink hot liquids.
Is that really required?
NOTE CONF
Um, also, not having the handle makes it more difficult.
And but if you get rid of four and five,
NOTE CONF
then you just have concrete concave and can hold liquid
and there's, you know, buckets and balls and there's lots
NOTE CONF
of things that meet the definition then.
So it's no longer a good definition.
NOTE CONF
So even even a simple case like this you can
contest some of the properties.
NOTE CONF
And The whole approach starts to seem problematic.
Membership is not always clear cut.
NOTE CONF
Is olive a fruit or is it a vegetable?
Is a poet an animal?
NOTE CONF
Well, at some level all people are animals, right?
So this is strictly true, but it seems very counterintuitive.
NOTE CONF
Candlestick is that furniture and so on.
So it's uh, people struggle with definitions in those cases.
NOTE CONF
And then there's these technicality effects that I've already mentioned.
And we'll come back to that once we look at
NOTE CONF
similarity based theories.
So typical category.
NOTE CONF
So a Robin is a fairly typical bird.
A dog is a fairly typical mammal.
NOTE CONF
Diamond is really a good example of a precious stone
and so on.
NOTE CONF
But how about atypical one?
An ostrich is not a bird doesn't fly.
NOTE CONF
Whale is a mammal, but maybe not a very typical
one.
NOTE CONF
Turquoise is a precious stone, but maybe not as typical
as a diamond.
NOTE CONF
And so on.
And people actually show slower reaction times for atypical compared
NOTE CONF
to typical category members.
Okay, so that's something that we need to take into
NOTE CONF
account in our theory of category membership.
And yeah, it's you know, if you Google a bit,
NOTE CONF
you find a lot of atypical examples.
Is this a share?
NOTE CONF
It's more like a chaise longue right.
Or sofa type thing.
NOTE CONF
Is this really a cat?
Looks a bit like a dog.
NOTE CONF
Is this really a dog with all this hair and
a weird shape and so on?
NOTE CONF
So there's always atypical category members.
So people have tried to tweak the classical theory, but
NOTE CONF
it's not really something that people advocate anymore.
So what's the alternative?
NOTE CONF
So the alternative are similarity based theories of categorisation.
And you can think of these as defined in terms
NOTE CONF
of.
Features.
NOTE CONF
Just like the classical theory.
But now we don't need to check all the features
NOTE CONF
anymore.
It's enough if if two elements are similar in terms
NOTE CONF
of their features.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So a bit like the word vectors we saw a
moment ago.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Uh, intersection and crossroad.
NOTE CONF
Um, they are synonyms or near synonyms.
So they have similar vectors.
NOTE CONF
And here we are assuming that the members of the
category have similar vectors.
NOTE CONF
And we'll see how we can make this precise in
a moment.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we no longer need to meet all the all
NOTE CONF
the elements of the definition.
So and this is.
NOTE CONF
Can be illustrated.
And I don't think Wittgenstein invented this, but he came
NOTE CONF
up with some nice examples.
So the elements of a category or concept are similar,
NOTE CONF
and they resemble each other like members of a family
resemble each other.
NOTE CONF
So this is the Wittgenstein family.
This, I think, is the great man himself.
NOTE CONF
And this is a composite.
The pictures of the family members superimposed on each other.
NOTE CONF
And the result is someone who looks like a typical
member of the family.
NOTE CONF
But it doesn't look like any one member.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so this is an analogous analogy that he suggests
for categories.
NOTE CONF
Right.
The members of the category, they're all similar to each
NOTE CONF
other.
And you can average them and get a prototypical member.
NOTE CONF
But they're not.
There's no simple definitional rule to say whether something is
NOTE CONF
within the category or not.
Okay, so this is just a motivating example.
NOTE CONF
There is actually a theory that's based on this.
It's called prototype theory.
NOTE CONF
And it says that categories are organised around a category
prototype, which is a summary of of the elements of
NOTE CONF
the individual representation, a bit like the average family member
here.
NOTE CONF
And so you have different words.
And you would have one particular representation which is sort
NOTE CONF
of an abstract, very typical bird.
And that's the prototype.
NOTE CONF
And then categories become a bit a bit fuzzy right.
Because you can if you have a new member you
NOTE CONF
can see is it close to the prototype or not?
But it might be close to several prototypes, right?
NOTE CONF
So there might be in between the category in between
two categories.
NOTE CONF
And the membership is meant to be similarity based.
So you would say that this bird is clearly very
NOTE CONF
similar to the prototype.
That's a bit less similar but still quite similar.
NOTE CONF
This one is sort of small and and and pudgy,
but still similar to the prototype, whereas an ostrich would
NOTE CONF
be less similar, or a penguin would be even less
similar, and so on.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So now you have a notion a of topicality.
NOTE CONF
The prototype is the most typical category member.
And you have a notion of how good a category
NOTE CONF
member you are, how close you are to the prototype.
And you get these fuzzy fuzzy boundaries, right.
NOTE CONF
So is this a cup or a ball?
It could be both.
NOTE CONF
And in the prototype theory you could say, well, it's
0.75 a ball and 0.25 a cup, right?
NOTE CONF
Because you have the prototype for cup prototype football.
And then this is somewhere in between and maybe a
NOTE CONF
bit closer to ball.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So you you get this for free that the boundaries
are no longer clear.
NOTE CONF
They're fuzzy.
And something can be a mix of multiple categories.
NOTE CONF
And you can express whether it's typical or close to
the prototype.
NOTE CONF
So now we can explain prototype quality sorry, topicality effects
and borderline cases.
NOTE CONF
It's also economical right.
So you compute this prototype just by averaging right.
NOTE CONF
This gives us a theory of learning as well.
I encounter lots and lots of words and I just
NOTE CONF
average the the representations for each of these birds and
the average I can Continuously update the average.
NOTE CONF
The average is my prototype, and so I have a
simple way of representing the the category.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, problem is that sometimes averages and and summaries
are ill defined or bad.
NOTE CONF
I mean, I can average the pictures of birds, for
example, but, um, for, for numbers, for example, this wouldn't
NOTE CONF
really work very well.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So, um, the prototypical prime number, I don't know, maybe
five is a prototypical prime number, but it's certainly not
NOTE CONF
the average of all prime numbers that wouldn't work.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Or for concepts.
Um, democracy, I don't know, is this concept the average
NOTE CONF
of the properties of all democratic countries.
So yeah, it might work quite well for concrete things,
NOTE CONF
but for abstract things like numbers and abstract concepts probably
doesn't work as well.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and, um, it also imposes strong restrictions on learnability.
Right?
NOTE CONF
Because only if I can build these prototypes, a category
is learnable.
NOTE CONF
And that might be too restrictive.
So people have come up with an alternative.
NOTE CONF
It's another similarity based theory.
And it's based on, um, not it doesn't use a
NOTE CONF
prototype basically.
So, uh, and this is called exemplar theory.
NOTE CONF
So it essentially means instead of building a prototype and
averaging, whenever you encounter an element of your category, you
NOTE CONF
just store it.
And so you have cats and dogs.
NOTE CONF
You store all instances of cats and dogs that you've
you've ever seen.
NOTE CONF
And then you have a new animal here, this one
in the middle, and you just compute the similarity to
NOTE CONF
all the cats and all the dogs.
And if it's on average closer to cat here, black
NOTE CONF
is the cats compared to closer to dog here red
are the dogs.
NOTE CONF
Then you classify this as a cat.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it, um, it does away with the prototype.
It assumes you store all the exemplars, and then you
NOTE CONF
just check the existing exemplars, which, you know, the category
of.
NOTE CONF
And you, you output the one that you're closest to
on average.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Average distance to all the cats.
NOTE CONF
Average distance to all the dogs.
And then based on this this is a cat because
NOTE CONF
the average distance to all the cats is lower okay.
And here's a an algorithm.
NOTE CONF
So you have a list of all previous, uh, exemplars.
Us.
NOTE CONF
And now you want to classify a new exemplar.
So you retrieve all the cats you've encountered.
NOTE CONF
I retrieve the memories of all known cats.
Memory of a dog, memory of stuffed animals, memory of
NOTE CONF
a raccoon, and so on.
And then you compute the total similarity or average similarity
NOTE CONF
of the positive and negative exemplars.
And then this is a cat.
NOTE CONF
If it is more similar to the cat exemplars than
the non cat exemplars okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is actually uh, in machine learning this is
called classification.
NOTE CONF
In case you've you've seen this before.
This is exactly the same idea has been invented independently
NOTE CONF
in machine learning or maybe not independently I don't know.
So and but I keep talking about similarities.
NOTE CONF
How do I compare to cats?
Right.
NOTE CONF
So I have to encode the cats in some way,
for example as a vector of features.
NOTE CONF
And then I can compute the similarity.
I can do cosine similarity or I can just count
NOTE CONF
how many features are the same.
Um, cosine similarity as we've seen in the previous lecture
NOTE CONF
would be an example.
So this is all a bit abstract.
NOTE CONF
So I think it will help to look at an
example.
NOTE CONF
And let's do this now.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is a really simple example.
We have a new animal.
NOTE CONF
Uh Rex can be either a cat or a dog.
And, uh, I give you a set of features.
NOTE CONF
So the size is four.
It has fur.
NOTE CONF
So fur equals.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
CSS Carnival equals null.
So it's only those three features.
NOTE CONF
And is Rex a cat or a dog?
Based on exemplar theory.
NOTE CONF
And these are my exemplars.
Only for exemplars.
NOTE CONF
Fido.
Category.
NOTE CONF
Dog.
Size five.
NOTE CONF
Fur.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Carnivore.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Max.
Category.
NOTE CONF
Dog size 2.5.
For.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Carnivore.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
And so on.
NOTE CONF
So what I need to do now is to compare
Rex to each of these exemplars.
NOTE CONF
And measure the distance.
And here we're just going to assume distance is the
NOTE CONF
number of features that are different right.
So or similarity is the number of features that are
NOTE CONF
the same.
So for example if we compare Rex and Fido size
NOTE CONF
is five.
Size is four.
NOTE CONF
So that's different.
For yes for yes that's the same carnivore.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
No.
NOTE CONF
So distance would be two right.
Because two out of three features are different.
NOTE CONF
Then we do the same for all the four categories,
and then we classify Rex as the category that it
NOTE CONF
is closest to.
Right.
NOTE CONF
That the similarity is highest.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you take a moment to try to work this
out.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes.
I said.
NOTE CONF
That I don't know if you guys.
You know.
NOTE CONF
I.
Just want to be able.
NOTE CONF
To do.
Something.
NOTE CONF
I love it.
Okay, let's see what people think.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
Let's go through each of the exemplars.
So, um, this has a similarity of two.
NOTE CONF
No.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
One.
Um, this has a similarity of, uh, one as well,
NOTE CONF
because, size is different.
First, the same carnival is different.
NOTE CONF
This has a similarity of one.
No.
NOTE CONF
Carnival?
No.
NOTE CONF
For yes of one.
And this has a similarity of.
NOTE CONF
So this is the closest right.
Two out of three.
NOTE CONF
But if you take the overall similarity.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Similarity to this card in this card, then this is
higher than the similarity to this dog and this dog.
NOTE CONF
So the correct the correct answer is cat.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So this is the most similar one.
But we're looking to the we're looking at the overall
NOTE CONF
similarity right.
So we have two cats and two dogs.
NOTE CONF
So we can just count how many features are the
same for the two cats.
NOTE CONF
And how many features are the same for the two
dogs.
NOTE CONF
And there's more shared features with the dogs.
With the cats.
NOTE CONF
So Rex is a cat.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Final question.
We have looked at this exemplar theory and we've just
NOTE CONF
seen an example.
Right.
NOTE CONF
You need to compare to all the exemplars.
And then you need to see on average.
NOTE CONF
Which category are you closest to.
What are potential problems.
NOTE CONF
Here's a list of potential problems.
So if you have a large number of exemplars then
NOTE CONF
this doesn't work very well.
We can't deal with taxonomic effects how categories are related.
NOTE CONF
We need to define features.
We can't model topicality effects.
NOTE CONF
We require a similarity function.
We can't handle cases where an exemplar is more part
NOTE CONF
of more than one category.
So what do you think?
NOTE CONF
Which are possible limitations?
And we have got to be good to go.
NOTE CONF
So.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
I think it's all right.
I don't.
NOTE CONF
Know.
What's.
NOTE CONF
Going on behind them?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what do people think?
Okay, here's the answer.
NOTE CONF
So one problem is large number of exemplars.
Let's assume, you know, you've seen a lot of dogs,
NOTE CONF
maybe hundreds or in case of other things.
I don't know people.
NOTE CONF
You've seen hundreds, maybe thousands, right?
So it's a very costly computation if you have to
NOTE CONF
compare to all the elements of the set of people
or cats.
NOTE CONF
So that's a problem.
You need to get the features somehow, right.
NOTE CONF
Maybe you can learn them in the same as you
learn word embeddings.
NOTE CONF
But that's an open question.
Topicality effects are difficult to, uh, to model.
NOTE CONF
We know that a certain new object is a cat
or a dog, but we don't know how typical it
NOTE CONF
is for that category.
That's a difference to the prototype theory, right?
NOTE CONF
Where we could just say, is it very similar to
the prototype or not?
NOTE CONF
Here we don't have any prototypes and cases where an
object is part of more than one category are also
NOTE CONF
difficult to handle.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But.
Okay, so just to contrast the two similarity based approaches.
NOTE CONF
So they're both similarity based but they use similarity in
a different way.
NOTE CONF
Prototype theory assumes that there's a prototype, a kind of
average, a typical member of the category.
NOTE CONF
And then we just need to compute similarity to the
prototype, so much less computation.
NOTE CONF
In exemplar theory, you assume you have stored all the
exemplars, and then you compute the distance to the individual
NOTE CONF
exemplars in a category.
So there's no abstraction, there's no prototype, there's no topicality.
NOTE CONF
There are some evidence that shows that maybe both types
of theories, there's some truth in it, but they're used
NOTE CONF
in different situations.
For example, you could start by learning a category in
NOTE CONF
terms of exemplars.
But then as you see more and more of them,
NOTE CONF
you start to abstract and build prototypes.
So it could be part of the same process.
NOTE CONF
So I have a bit of time in this talk
to talk about a few a few problems of both
NOTE CONF
similarity based approaches, prototype and exemplar based.
It's sometimes hard to know which properties to compare, right?
NOTE CONF
This is a plum and a lawnmower.
They're both red.
NOTE CONF
They both weigh less than a ton.
They both found on Earth.
NOTE CONF
They're both bigger than a grain of sand.
These are all properties, but maybe not the ones we
NOTE CONF
want to compare.
So how do we figure that out?
NOTE CONF
Right.
We need to be given our features somehow.
NOTE CONF
Then there's context effects.
So if you ask people if Sweden, Poland or Hungary
NOTE CONF
is more similar to Austria, then Sweden is more similar
than Hungary.
NOTE CONF
If you ask.
Sweden, Norway or Hungary?
NOTE CONF
Most.
Sweden, Norway or Hungary.
NOTE CONF
More similar to Austria than people say.
Hungary is more similar than Sweden.
NOTE CONF
So these are so-called framing effects and will actually come
back to these framing effects in the next lecture in
NOTE CONF
another context.
And then there is not just similarity.
NOTE CONF
There's things like function as well.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So these shoes they look like wellies.
But are they actually wellies right.
NOTE CONF
They have an open top.
So that wouldn't actually be very useful in a in
NOTE CONF
in in rain.
So do they still count as wellies or is this
NOTE CONF
maybe an Aristotelian essential property.
And if they don't, you know, if they don't keep
NOTE CONF
out the water then we don't want to classify them
that way.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I'll skip the last example and we're out of
time.
NOTE CONF
Thank you very much.